The reaction of Eric Dier, the Tottenham defender, said it all. He had
just conceded one penalty, which allowed Bruno Fernandes to equalise
for Manchester United, and now it appeared that he had conceded
another at the very end.
Dier knew that he had not touched Fernandes before the United man went
to ground but the referee, Jon Moss, had bought it and pointed to the
spot. Dier was flabbergasted. Enter VAR. When the first replay was
shown, it was plain that Fernandes had, at best, initiated the contact
and, at worst, dived. Dier was reprieved. No penalty. Spurs breathed
in collective relief.
Dier had been angry enough about the first one, except this time he
had put his hands on Paul Pogba, having been bamboozled by a piece of
skill from the Frenchman. Pogba, on as a 62nd-minute substitute,
danced past Dier on the byline before feeling the contact and hitting
the ground.
When Fernandes converted, it was no more than United deserved for
their front-foot football and it added up to a reprieve for David de
Gea, their goalkeeper. He looked to have Steven Bergwijn’s first-half
shot within his sights, however well struck it was, and then he did
not.
When it reared up off De Gea’s hands and into the net, Tottenham had
something to defend, something to reignite their season, and Roy
Keane, the former United captain, had something to get angry about in
the Sky Sports studio. Very angry. The defending from Harry Maguire in
the build-up had been loose in the extreme but De Gea was in the line
of fire.
It was an absorbing game that built to its climax with United turning
the screw after Pogba was introduced with Mason Greenwood. And it was
the latter who almost stole all three points with virtually the last
kick of the game only to see his low shot fly past the far post. Spurs
were on their knees. They narrowly dodged the knock-out that would
have blown a hole in their hopes of a Champions League finish.
It was a slow-burning start, with the first chance falling to United
on 22 minutes. And it was a chance out of pretty much nothing, created
by an aberration from Davinson Sánchez. He sent an attempted clearing
header straight at Marcus Rashford, who guided an instinctive
half-volley goalwards. Hugo Lloris saved with his feet.
José Mourinho had started Érik Lamela ahead of Tanguy Ndombele a
setback for Spurs’s record signing but the Argentinian justified the
decision, roaming with menace from the No 10 role. Lamela helped to
make Spurs dangerous on the quick counter, although the opening goal
was all about Bergwijn’s determination.
The January signing collected possession inside the United half after
Serge Aurier had beaten Rashford and put his head down, picking up
pace and momentum. He ran inside Maguire while the chasing Fred would
be blocked off by Lamela. Then came the moment that De Gea will want
to forget.
The United goalkeeper made partial amends on 31 minutes when he tipped
over a Son Heung-min header after Bergwijn had raided up the right and
United were reprieved moments later when Sánchez flicked high after a
miscued Dier shot broke for him.
Rashford was central to United’s only other flicker before the
interval, although the last touch from a Fred free-kick came not off
him but Sanchez. Lloris made a scrambling save.
The contrast in the fortunes of the clubs before shutdown could
scarcely have been greater Spurs winless in six, crashing out of cup
competitions; United unbeaten in 11, “moving in the right direction”
to quote Ole Gunnar Solskjær.
This was a clean slate, albeit a weird one, perhaps the slickest
stadium in England beautifully dressed but lacking soul, failing to
communicate the urgency of the occasion.
When everything is stripped away, when the volume is turned down and
the only sounds come from the players’ shouts, it is plainly
surreal. The positive reading is that it focuses minds on the
technical spectacle, on how players at this level have extraordinarily
good touches in tight spaces. The lack of time they have to make their
decisions is remarkable. Then, there are the shuddering physical
challenges. You can really hear them now.
United tried to make the game, hogging possession and Spurs were
content to invite them on. Although Harry Kane was rusty up front,
there was plenty from Bergwijn, Lamela and Son behind him.
Fernandes fizzed wide from distance early in the second half but
United were struggling for penetration until Solskjær made his
substitutions and, almost immediately, his team advertised the
equaliser.
First, Anthony Martial was denied by a saving Dier challenge following
Fernandes’s pass and, moments later, by a wonderful Lloris save. When
Martial unloaded with his left foot after Luke Shaw’s pull-back, it
looked like a certain goal. Flying through the air, Lloris had other
ideas. The drama, however, was only just beginning.
